# Spring Batch Support
This library provides some utilities to make it easier to interact with the MyBatis Spring Batch support.

MyBatis Spring provides support for interacting with Spring Batch (see
[http://www.mybatis.org/spring/batch.html](http://www.mybatis.org/spring/batch.html)). This support consists of
specialized implementations of Spring Batch's `ItemReader` and `ItemWriter` interfaces that have support for MyBatis
mappers.

The `ItemWriter` implementation works with SQL generated by MyBatis Dynamic SQL with no modification needed.

The `ItemReader` implementations need special care. Those classes assume that all query parameters will be placed in a
Map (as per usual when using multiple parameters in a query). MyBatis Dynamic SQL, by default, builds a parameter
object that is intended to be the only parameter for a query. The library contains utilities for overcoming this
difficulty.

## Using MyBatisCursorItemReader

The `MyBatisCursorItemReader` class works with built-in support for cursor based queries in MyBatis. Queries of this
type will read row by row and MyBatis will convert each result row to a result object without having to read the entire
result set into memory. The normal rendering for MyBatis will work for queries using this reader, but special care
must be taken to prepare the parameter values for use with this reader. See the following example:

```java
@Bean
public MyBatisCursorItemReader<PersonRecord> reader(SqlSessionFactory sqlSessionFactory) {
    SelectStatementProvider selectStatement =  select(person.allColumns())
            .from(person)
            .where(lastName, isEqualTo("flintstone"))
            .build()
            .render(RenderingStrategies.MYBATIS3);

    MyBatisCursorItemReader<PersonRecord> reader = new MyBatisCursorItemReader<>();
    reader.setQueryId(PersonMapper.class.getName() + ".selectMany");
    reader.setSqlSessionFactory(sqlSessionFactory);
    reader.setParameterValues(SpringBatchUtility.toParameterValues(selectStatement));
    return reader;
}
```

Note the use of `SpringBatchUtility.toParameterValues(...)`. This utility will set up the parameter Map correctly for the
rendered statement, and for use with a library supplied `@selectProvider`. See the following for an example of the mapper
method used for the query coded above:

```java
@Mapper
public interface PersonMapper {

    @SelectProvider(type=SpringBatchProviderAdapter.class, method="select")
    @Results({
        @Result(column="id", property="id", id=true),
        @Result(column="first_name", property="firstName"),
        @Result(column="last_name", property="lastName")
    })
    List<PersonRecord> selectMany(Map<String, Object> parameterValues);
}
```

Note the use of the `SpringBatchProviderAdapter` - that adapter knows how to retrieve the rendered queries from the
parameter map initialed in the method above.

### Migrating from 1.x Support for MyBatisCursorItemReader

In version 1.x, the library supplied a special utility for creating a select statement as follows:

```java
SelectStatementProvider selectStatement =  SpringBatchUtility.selectForCursor(person.allColumns())
        .from(person)
        .where(lastName, isEqualTo("flintstone"))
        .build()
        .render();
```

That utility method was limited in capability. The new method allows the full capabilities of the library. To migrate,
follow these steps:

1. Replace `SpringBatchUtility.selectForCursor(...)` with `SqlBuilder.select(...)`
2. Replace `render()` with `render(RenderingStrategies.MYBATIS3)`

## Using MyBatisPagingItemReader

The `MyBatisPagingItemReader` class works with paging queries - queries that read rows in pages and process page by page
rather than row by row. The normal rendering for MyBatis will work NOT for queries using this reader because MyBatis
Spring support supplies specially named parameters for page size, offset, etc. So the query must be rendered properly
to respond to these parameter values that are supplied at runtime. As with the other reader, special care
must also be taken to prepare the parameter values for use with this reader. See the following example:

```java
@Bean 
public MyBatisPagingItemReader<PersonRecord> reader(SqlSessionFactory sqlSessionFactory) {
    SelectStatementProvider selectStatement =  select(person.allColumns())
            .from(person)
            .where(forPagingTest, isEqualTo(true))
            .orderBy(id)
            .limit(SpringBatchUtility.MYBATIS_SPRING_BATCH_PAGESIZE)
            .offset(SpringBatchUtility.MYBATIS_SPRING_BATCH_SKIPROWS)
            .build()
            .render(SpringBatchUtility.SPRING_BATCH_PAGING_ITEM_READER_RENDERING_STRATEGY);

    MyBatisPagingItemReader<PersonRecord> reader = new MyBatisPagingItemReader<>();
    reader.setQueryId(PersonMapper.class.getName() + ".selectMany");
    reader.setSqlSessionFactory(sqlSessionFactory);
    reader.setParameterValues(SpringBatchUtility.toParameterValues(selectStatement));
    reader.setPageSize(7);
    return reader;
}
```
Notice the following important items:

1. The `limit` and `offset` methods in the query are used to set up paging support in the query. With MyBatis Spring
   batch support, the integration library will supply values for those parameters at runtime. Any values you code in the
   select statement will be ignored - only the values supplied by the library will be used. We supply two constants
   to make this clearer: `MYBATIS_SPRING_BATCH_PAGESIZE` and `MYBATIS_SPRING_BATCH_SKIPROWS`. You can use these values
   to make the code clearer, but again the values will be ignored at runtime.
2. The query must be rendered with the `SPRING_BATCH_PAGING_ITEM_READER_RENDERING_STRATEGY` rendering strategy. This
   rendering strategy will render the query so that it will respond properly to the runtime values supplied for page size
   and skip rows.

### Migrating from 1.x Support for MyBatisPagingItemReader

In version 1.x, the library supplied a special utility for creating a select statement as follows:

```java
SelectStatementProvider selectStatement =  SpringBatchUtility.selectForPaging(person.allColumns())
        .from(person)
        .where(forPagingTest, isEqualTo(true))
        .orderBy(id)
        .build()
        .render();
```

That utility method was very limited in capability. It only supported limit and offset based queries - which are not
supported in all databases. The new method allows the full capabilities of the library. To migrate,
follow these steps:

1. Replace `SpringBatchUtility.selectForPaging(...)` with `SqlBuilder.select(...)`
2. Add `limit()`, `fetchFirst()`, and `offset()` method calls as appropriate for your query and database
3. Replace `render()` with `render(RenderingStrategies.SPRING_BATCH_PAGING_ITEM_READER_RENDERING_STRATEGY)`


## Complete Examples

The unit tests for MyBatis Dynamic SQL include a complete example of using MyBatis Spring Batch support using the
MyBatis supplied reader as well as both types of MyBatis supplied writers. You can see the full example
here: [https://github.com/mybatis/mybatis-dynamic-sql/tree/master/src/test/java/examples/springbatch](https://github.com/mybatis/mybatis-dynamic-sql/tree/master/src/test/java/examples/springbatch)
