<!--

       Copyright 2016-2017 the original author or authors.

       Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
       you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
       You may obtain a copy of the License at

          http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

       Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
       distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
       WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
       See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
       limitations under the License.

-->
<html>
<head>
<title>MyBatis Dynamic SQL</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>MyBatis Dynamic SQL</h1>
<p>This library is a framework for creating dynamic SQL statements.  Think of it as a typesafe SQL templating library,
with additional support for MyBatis3 and Spring JDBC Templates.</p>

<p>The library will generate full DELETE, INSERT, SELECT, and UPDATE statements, or suitable statement fragments.
The most common use case is to generate statements, and a matching set of parameters, that can be directly used
by MyBatis.  The library will also generate statements and parameter objects that are compatible with Spring JDBC
templates.</p>

<p>The library will generate these types of statements:</p>

<ul>
  <li>DELETE statements with a flexible WHERE clauses</li>
  <li>INSERT statements of two types: one that will insert null values into columns (a "full" insert), or one that will
  ignore null input values and their associated columns (a "selective" insert)</li>
  <li>SELECT statements with a flexible column list, a flexible WHERE clause, and support for "distinct" and "order by"</li>
  <li>UPDATE statements with a flexible WHERE clause.  Like the INSERT statement, there are two varieties of UPDATE statements:
  a "full" update that will set null values and a "selective" update that will ignore null input values</li>
</ul>

<p>The primary goals of the library are:</p>

<ol>
  <li>Typesafe - to the extent possible, the library will ensure that parameter types match
   the database column types</li>
  <li>Expressive - statements are built in a way that clearly communicates their meaning
   (thanks to Hamcrest for some inspiration)</li>
  <li>Flexible - where clauses can be built using any combination of and, or, and nested conditions</li>
  <li>Extensible - the library will render statements for MyBatis3, Spring JDBC templates or plain JDBC.
   It can be extended to  generate clauses for other frameworks as well.  Custom where conditions can
   be added easily if none of the built in conditions are sufficient for your needs.</li> 
  <li>Small - the library is a very small dependency to add.  It has no transitive dependencies.</li>
</ol>
   
<p>This library grew out of a desire to create a utility that could be used to improve the code
generated by MyBatis Generator, but the library can be used on it's own with very little setup required.</p>

</body>
</html>
